.TH TEXWORKS 1

.SH NAME
.B texworks
\- a simple TeX front-end program

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B texworks
[OPTIONS] [FILES]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B TeXworks
is an environment for authoring TeX (LaTeX, ConTeXt, etc) documents, with a Unicode-based, TeX-aware editor, integrated PDF viewer, and a clean, simple interface accessible to casual and non-technical users.

It is inspired by Dick Koch's award-winning TeXShop program for Mac OS X, which has made quality typesetting through TeX accessible to a wider community of users, without a technical or intimidating face. The goal of
.B TeXworks
is to deliver a similarly integrated, easy-to-use environment for users on other platforms, especially GNU/Linux and Windows.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help, -?
Display a short overview over all command line options
.TP
.B --position=, -p
Open the next specified file at the given position (line or page)
.TP
.B --version, -v
Display version information

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
TW_INIPATH
Overrides the location of the preferences file.
.TP
TW_LIBPATH
Overrides the location of the additional configuration and library files.
.TP
TW_DICPATH
Overrides the location of dictionary files.
.TP
TW_HELPPATH
Overrides the location of help files.
.TP
TW_PLUGINPATH
Overrides the location of plugins.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/TUG/TeXworks.conf
Text file to store the preferences.
.TP
.I ~/.TeXworks/*
Additional configuration and library files (e.g. for auto completion, templates, etc.).
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/texworks-setup.ini
Setup file to override the location of the files mentioned above (e.g. for enabling portable operation).

.SH SEE ALSO
.B TeXworks
homepage: \%http://tug.org/texworks/

.B TeXworks
development: \%http://code.google.com/p/texworks/

.SH BUGS
If you find a bug, please report it at \%http://code.google.com/p/texworks/issues/list

.SH AUTHORS
Jonathan Kew, Stefan Löffler, Charlie Sharpsteen, and others

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2007-2012  Jonathan Kew, Stefan Löffler, Charlie Sharpsteen

License GPLv2+: GNU GPL (version 2 or later) <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>

This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
